Well, honorable minister, very good to have you here.
Honorable Paula Bennett, excellent to have you here as well.
And Natalie, uh, McMurdy welcome
and everyone else who's here.
Uh, we have you in front of US Minister for 30 minutes.
And then, um, MAC team, um, for the next couple of hours.
I'll open it up to you, minister.
I'll give you a couple of minutes
and then we'll open up to members to go from there.
Yeah. All right. Well look, thank you
to everyone on the committee,
and, um, it's real pleasure to be here
to talk about the things that are happening at pharma,
which I believe are overwhelmingly positive.
Uh, that is thanks to the leadership of the chair.
Uh, Paula Bennett, uh, and Natalie McMurtry, uh, who is new.
Uh, I think this is the first time she's
appeared, uh, before the committee.
Uh, she's actually picked up her life in Alberta, Canada,
moved from Edmonton to Wellington, um, not just
for slightly warmer weather,
but also, um, for, uh, a really great challenge.
And I think it's a real point of pride for New Zealand
that our model is globally respected, uh,
and that, uh, Natalie was prepared to move here.
So, welcome, and we're very pleased
to have you already doing a, a fabulous job.
Um, when it comes to the, some of the highlights, uh,
recently obviously we've had a, a,
a serious uplift in the medicines budget, $604 million
in mid 2024.
That's led to 31 new listings, um,
and 52 widenings of access in the 24 25, uh, year.
So far, we've widened access to another 13 medicines.
Um, in 2324,
we saw 4.2 million New Zealanders received funded medicines.
Um, and in budget 24, we had a total
of 7 billion over four years.
So we've never spent so much,
and I've gotta say the Farm Act team have responded really
well to the demand.
I mean, these guys, they love buying medicines.
That's what they come to work for.
They're getting good deals. Um,
however, they have responded
to a really large increase in volume,
so we thank them for that.
We've also resolved a long standing problem of
who exactly in New Zealand buys
or purchases, uh, medical devices for the government.
That's been a split and uneasy split, I would say, between P
and Health New Zealand for a long time.
Uh, minister Brown and I have come up
with a resolution agreed by cabinet
that there will be some devices bought, uh, by Phar, uh,
and some, uh, by Health New Zealand, roughly half and half.
I think there's about 28 categories, uh, with each,
uh, organization.
And that has, uh, meant
that both sides can get down to what they're good at.
Um, generally, uh, med Health, New Zealand dealing
with things, uh, such as consumables, uh,
and some machinery where connection with the, um,
clinicians is important.
Uh, pharma Act, dealing with, uh, materials that, uh,
generally claim to have a, a, a therapeutic benefit.
Um, we have worked through budget 25 or at least
and 26, uh, on really a, a new way of budgeting.
Our goal is for Farm Act to make better budget bids
to demonstrate the value to the rest of government,
of greater investment, um, in medicines
and devices, uh, to demonstrate
how it can actually uplift society, uh,
and save the government money elsewhere if we buy more.
That's very different from farm.
Traditional role of managing, uh, within a fixed budget.
We have an IT upgrade of around $7 million
that has been funded, um, by successful litigation, uh,
from the COVID era, some of that money being kept
and used for IT upgrades,
because while I mentioned the, the hard work
by the pharma people, um, it's fair
to say they've been working with some clunky gear.
Uh, the government's also made a number of other changes.
Uh, for example, prescriptions, uh,
now can be as long as 12 months.
And that has impacts, uh, in some ways
because there are fewer fees.
Uh, but it also makes life a lot better, uh, for a lot
of people who have medication over a long period of time.
It also takes demand of gps.
Um, the Phar Act reset is very important.
Uh, we had, uh, a medicine summit,
and I know some of the members of the committee were at
that about a month ago.
Um, a lot of the people
who were participants in the summit had been actively
picketing phar only two and a half years ago.
So we have gone through a total reset.
Uh, as per my letter of expectations,
I think Paula has stewarded the organization extremely well,
uh, to start seeing clinicians, vendors, patients, uh,
as partners in a shared mission rather than opponents
and an adversarial relationship.
So we're very pleased, uh, about the, the fact that even
that meeting is now possible
and there's real substance to it.
Uh, such as the patient's advocacy group.
We have begun, uh,
publicly funding cancer medicines in new settings.
That's a major development.
Uh, there are people who paid their taxes all their life
and pay for their health insurance.
Uh, they start their cancer treatment in a private setting,
and then Farm Act funds a medicine in order to get access to
that medicine publicly funded.
They would've to change clinician
and change facility while they have cancer.
That is just cruel, uh,
that is no longer necessary, uh, from now.
Um, and we also are working hard on, uh,
faster processing.
This has obviously been a challenge given the volume uplift,
volume up uplift is a good thing.
We're funding more medicines, we're spending more money.
That's great, but it's also put pressure,
so we're working through that.
Um, so look, altogether, I feel really proud
to be the minister responsible for pharma.
I think that a lot of positive developments are occurring,
challenges unquestioned, uh,
but we're facing them very well.
Excellent. Thank you. Question from
members, Ricardo.
Jenny,
Let's get a really quick one, Karen, on page 58
of your report, um, noting your comments you made
around building confide patients.
Why do you think that, uh, despite all of that,
there's still a, um, increase in the number
of critics within, um, Maori,
and that you haven't really made much progress in
relationship to an and increase in Maori trust
and confidence and pharma.
What do you think you need to do in order to achieve that?
I think we need to deliver, uh, medicines faster
and better and have a more compassionate relationship
with clinicians, patients, um, and, uh, vendors, uh,
and see it as a shared enterprise rather than an
adversarial relationship.
Um, all of the things that we're doing, there's no reason
to think that Maori are different, uh,
from anyone else in the way
that they would respond to those goals.
Do you think any other government policies could be
contributing negatively to this lack
of increase in Maori trust and FAC and the health system?
No, I don't think so. I, I think to suggest that, um,
Maori people, um, somehow bring prejudices, uh,
from one area to the next, actually, I think you'll find
that we're quite sophisticated.
Chin. Oh, thank you.
Um, noting that, um, coalition government, um,
New Zealand First National
and Act, wanted to ensure patient voice was at the center
and, and were involved in the decision making processes.
How has Farm Act worked to achieve, um,
those coalition commitments?
So if you look at someone like Malcolm Mulholland, I mean,
for years the most vocal
and often the most trenchant, uh, critic, um,
he is now chairing the consumer Advocacy Committee.
So we have brought people who used to be picketing
outside phar inside p, um, that was unthinkable.
Uh, I wanna credit Paula with that,
and also our new chief executive Natalie.
Uh, so that is one thing that we've done
and our general approach in my letter of expectations
to Farm Act has been, look, there's only 5 million
of us know we've got shared problems.
We don't have time to fight each other,
and that is the spirit that they seem to be taking on.
Thank you. Pleasure. Thanks Mr. Chairman.
With your forbearance, a set of related questions, uh,
the culture review that you're, um, instigated, why hasn't
that been reported in full?
Um, I think, uh, well,
I'll let Paula answer this. Yes. Looks
Like she's, sorry.
Um, it was the board that commissioned, um, that works.
So certainly, um, from our perspective, um,
it does go into staffing issues
and it went into quite a bit of that.
And so the advice that we got was that actually doing the,
um, executive summary was enough, uh, for that.
Uh, and can you describe the, um, patient workshops
that were held last year and who initiated those?
The minister or the board?
Uh, well, the minister was very clear in his letter
of expectations and in our regular meetings that he wanted
as, um, the member, um, quite rightly said, you know,
patient voice is being heard a lot more.
And I felt that, um, so it was a board
that actually commissioned, um, those workshops.
I felt like it had got to a stage where there was sort
of almost such a divide,
and we did have an opportunity
with myself coming in the chair and things like that.
How could we capitalize on that to actually close that gap?
And I felt for us to do that, we had to look eye to eye.
We had to be able to take the honesty, um, excuse me,
and, um, and the bluntness of some of the hurt
that had gone on and to do that, that we had to do
that face-to-face and in a room
and genuinely not run it,
the Farm Act way, actually run it their way.
Hear, hearing that there, um,
was significant concerns being raised by patient groups.
What, what steps did you take as a board?
Make sure in a setting where tensions might be high, uh,
those concerns weren't unreasonably personalized at staff.
Uh, so for the first one, particular staff were not there.
So there was the board were there,
and I want to acknowledge, um, Dr.
Margaret, um, or from the board as well.
So only board members were there,
there was no staff members there at all.
Um, and then in the second meeting, um, not for all of it,
but for some of it, there were staff members there.
Um, from that perspective, I felt like I was there to try
and be the buffer if needed. Thank
You. A single
employee got a
$357,000 payout in a year.
Under review was that former chief executive Sarah Fit,
Uh, it's employment matter.
So that's as stated in the annual report.
There was that one payment that was made, um,
under employment, um, uh, under their employment contract.
When did you advise the minister
that employee department departing Farm Act would receive a
$350,000?
I don't think I ever gave the minister a number.
It's, um, confidential. And
Please, Mr. Chair,
What's to be expected in negotiations for someone?
Um, um, cessation payment for someone leaving
This is a $2 billion a year operation, buying medicines
for 4.2 million New Zealanders.
Uh, having the right leadership at the head is absolutely
critical, and I think the board's managed it very well.
The, uh, uh, that equates to at least
eight months of salary
of the highest paid individual at Farm Act during that time.
Do you consider that to be good use of taxpayer funds?
Well, you know, my, uh,
views about employment law are on record
and, uh, fairly expansive.
Um, but we are bound by the laws of this country,
and we have done, uh, everything that we need to under them.
Did, did you bungle your management
of Sarah Fitz exit and cost the taxpayers 350,000?
Well, I wasn't involved, uh,
as the minister. That is a board issue as
Questioned and Issue. And
as far as I'm concerned, uh,
the board has operated very effectively in challenging
circumstances as I see it.
You had a group of people who were, um, processing outside
farm, are now inside the tent,
working together on challenges
for New Zealanders. I think that's a good outcome.
Cam, I think the changes that have happened,
as we've seen in the last nine months with having, um,
Brendan Boyle in an acting role,
and now with our new chief executive, um, you know, you,
the truth is, we were in negotiations as you would
with someone exiting.
They had an employment agreement.
Um, we negotiated that we did everything within our powers
to actually do the best for New Zealanders
and New Zealand taxpayers.
But that was the terms of the agreement
that I got inherited.
Um, and that's, that's what it is.
This is well beyond the norm
In the public service.
Thanks. Uh, minister, you,
you've spoken about the expanding volume of medicines
and the widening of medicines.
How has p managed
to increase access to medicines for New Zealand?
What has p had to undertake to do that?
Well, it sounds easy.
Um, but actually spending money
and doing it well is a, a major challenge.
So if you look at the people that work at the front line
of pharma, they have had to work very hard to make sure and,
and not take the soft options
and say, oh, we've got this money.
We'll lower our standards.
They haven't lowered their standards.
Uh, they continue to seek savings wherever possible.
And actually just recently, they've, they've,
they've managed to fund a whole bunch of new drugs, uh,
by saving money on their current expenditure.
Uh, so they've had to keep their foot right
to the floor pedal to the metal.
They've had to make sure
that they are evaluating each new proposition, uh, carefully
and judiciously, and then negotiating
hard to get good prices.
So Kiwis get the maximum medicine
Amish. Mm-hmm. Thanks. And
thank you, minister.
How, how do you see PX supporting the wi wider healthcare
system in New Zealand?
Well, first of all, the availability
of medicines is absolutely crucial.
Um, and getting those at a competitive price, uh,
a lower price than we would get without the P Act model, uh,
that's really important.
So we have protected, as a government, the integrity
of the model, the independence of P Act,
and made sure that we've got the right people in the right
places, uh, to make it effective.
That's the first thing.
Uh, the second thing is
that it can actually seek win-wins if it has good
relationships with vendors, patients, uh, and clinicians.
And building those relationships is one thing was really
focused on, again, shared purpose,
not adversarial relationships.
And that's really been in my, that was in my initial letter
of expectations way back at the start of 24.
Um, and then finally, uh, finding new frontiers.
So we are now actively, uh, investigating ways
that the government overall could save money if we invested
in more medicines and more devices.
And we're gonna be taking better budget bits,
making the case that if we invested more in technology,
we can solve some of the seemingly, uh,
irreconcilable challenges this country has
with an aging population.
Infinite demand for healthcare, the only way you can deal
with that is to increase productivity.
Best way to do that with technology.
So, sorry, Mr. Thank you.
Um, so these savings that Farm Act has delivered,
how are they gonna benefit New Zealanders?
So when Farm can renegotiate a deal,
perhaps something goes off label
and they get a cheaper price, uh, perhaps a contract ends
and they go for a substitute, which they can get better.
Uh, that frees up, you know, often tens of millions
of dollars, and then they look at their overall budget
and say, okay, well we've squared that old thing away
and we're, we're getting a better deal now
with the surplus money, we can go further down the options
for investment list and get people more medicines they
would not have otherwise had.
This doesn't involve the taxpayer paying more.
It's just that pharma are constantly crunching down,
negotiating better deals and buying more for the same amount
And patent coming off, obviously.
Yeah, sorry. Yeah, well, that's how we can renegotiate
and get a much better price.
And I mean, it's pretty staggering.
4.1 million New Zealanders actually access, um, medicines
that, that pharma has negotiated.
And, um, and we've seen from the uplift another quarter
of a million people that have got access to medicines
because of the budget uplift, um, from last year.
So that's, um, pretty staggering too. Yes.
Um, so with, with kind of technology,
talking about new medicines coming along,
we are seeing medicines coming along that may be, um, have,
uh, different components may not be directly just a compound
which someone takes a car T cells probably a prime example.
Um, how do you think that's gonna fit in
with the pharma, uh, budget?
Or is that gonna be more, how are you going to cooperate
with Health New Zealand to fund some of these newer,
newer treatment options?
Well, there's a clear delineation
between devices and medicines.
So that's how we share, um,
our responsibilities with health NZ.
Um, but, you know, we are encouraging farming,
or I'm encouraging pharma, I'm encouraging these guys
to take a proactive approach.
Um, you still require a vendor
to actually make an application for funding.
Um, but we're enco I'm encouraging pharma to say, well, hey,
look, you know, maybe we need to make better budget bids.
There's things we could do that will save elsewhere.
So if you look at someone going through chemo, you know,
for months at a time, awful for them.
Awful, uh, amount of cost.
Um, you know, I don't claim to be a medical expert,
but it appears that CAR t uh, can actually save an awful,
uh, lot of pain.
And even though it may be more expensive upfront,
might save the taxpayer money overall.
So, you know, these are the kinds of things
where I think it's, it's critical that p has got a mission
to get New Zealand to the technology frontier.
Uh, we're not gonna do it
by just importing and training more people.
We will run out of people. We need more technology
to increase the productivity of our health workforce
Supplementary Mr.
Chair, does that mean that, um, cellular therapies, which,
um, I hope you've had a chance
to have some pseudo rine, um, minister, uh,
Well, so someone should legalize that.
Um, uh, so cellular therapies like CAR T,
which are not, as I understand it, a a pharmaceutical,
they're made from the individual's cell
outside the body in a lab, uh, uh, would be, um,
have a health technology assessment done by pharmac.
Is, is that how you see cellular therapies working?
Well, I would certainly look at the legislation and,
and think that's a possibility,
but operationally that, that's up to,
Um, Sorry, just for you, Mr.
Chair. Look, um, I know you've only got a few more minutes
with the minister and we are gonna be here for, well,
I'd love to and with Dr.
Uh, mark GR here as well.
We'd love to explore innovations and what's coming up
and how we actually do address some
of those real complexities.
So we thank you willingly
and happily spend more time on that.
'cause I think it's the biggest challenge that we've got.
Thank going forward across the whole health system.
Excellent. Just a couple of quick up on Dr.
Vere's initial question. Um,
we're non-disclosure agreements involved in the employment
matter that she referred to,
and do you think that's appropriate for taxpayers?
Will you release the amount
of legal fees spent either internally
or externally relating to that employment matter?
There's certainly, um, are non-disclosure agreements, um,
with it and with an employment law.
So for both of those reasons
and within the contract, I am limited in
what I can say and what I can do.
And actually that's out of respect
for anyone, quite frankly.
Um, and I certainly have respect
for the previous chief executive
and I will be abiding by that.
And does the minister think that's appropriate given
that it's taxpayer funding?
Uh, yes, I do. Um, people might want to, uh,
start casting blame about, but you know, the chair
and the board, uh, inherited a person who had been hired
before their time, uh, with a contract
that they didn't sign under employment law
that they're not responsible for.
And I think given those factors,
they have actually navigated a situation extremely well.
And pharma is going from strength of strength.
Will you release the legal costs to the tax?
How involved with that exit?
Which is the other part of the question?
Uh, can I check if I can, so sorry.
Just to not be able to answer that directly and get it,
and I might be able to ask one of my team,
but, um, different angle.
Yeah, I'm, I'm happy to. Thank you.
I've got, uh, Carlos, you haven't had one. You go,
Yes. Yes.
So, um, we heard a lot about your,
your achievement in the past 12 months.
We, we actually buy more wider assets and more saving.
So what's your l area of focus for farming?
Oh, they're not my achievements.
They're the achievements of the, the chair,
the chief executive, and, uh, just under a couple
of hundred Farm Act workers
who I think really deserve, uh, our praise.
Uh, all I do is write them a letter of expectations a couple
of times a year, um, so that they're your achievements.
But, uh, what do, where do I wanna see them focus next?
Um, thank you. Well, look, the culture is coming well,
that the devices, uh, are being fixed.
Um, I think the next big thing is transforming the way
that we do budget bids for medicines.
As I've alluded to a couple of times, we wanna go
to the Minister of Finance
and say, Hey, funding more medical technology
could be very good for you.
So that, oh, so there, yes.
Um, and obviously the next budget bid coming up, um,
you might like to look at
New Zealand First College and agreement.
That might be helpful.
Well, I tell you what, it, it might,
but, um, I'm sure, I'm sure the Minister of Finance can read
and, um, it hasn't worked for us so far.
So we're trying something new. Dr. Vera primary
Note, 22 to the annual report says total expenses
and financial and the financial year under review
was $238 million lower than budget.
Why was that?
So our, um,
and we can go right through finances, um, really happily
with you and get the team up, um, for some of that.
It is, um, a, we paid back the government,
back the government for the NOVAVAX vaccine.
So that was about $281 million
for the expenditure part as well.
Um, we have kept some money over lead so
that we can then pay
for the medicines from last year into this year.
Just, um, on that, we discussed
that at last annual review.
At last annual review, there was money from, um, the,
the COVID funds that had to be returned to the center,
but that's not the issue listed in note 22
for this annual review that's described as being part
of the National Pharmaceuticals purchasing appropriation
and to do also with the COVID vaccine now that, um,
fund is for spending on medicine.
So I'm wondering why you didn't spend
$238 million on medicines.
I might get the team to speak to that more. Sorry.
So that I'm getting myself not confused and mixed up.
I focus on the budget for medicines
and I let the accounting treatments from year
to year be dealt with by the team. Well,
I imagine you'd be very disappointed
of $238 million available for medicines that you had won
for negotiations with your, uh, minister
of finance didn't get spent. Well,
Not necessarily, because if I was obliged to keep
that 200 going year
after year, uh,
then we'd have a big disappointment in the year to follow.
That's actually what this government inherited, uh,
was a massive fiscal cliff.
Uh, we had to put in $1.8 billion, uh,
to fill in the promises that had been made,
but not delivered in the long term. Well,
Minister and Mr. Chair,
if I may, there could be an alternative situation
minister, which was that actually the COVID, uh,
requirements for COVID funding that perhaps were represented
to you were not, uh, as high as actually required.
And the statements that, uh, the agency made prior
to your first budget inflated the likely future costs
of medicine, giving the appearance
of much greater funding need than there actually was.
Well, I can assure you that spending every dollar on
That, that's 238 million sitting on the table.
Yeah, well, we can speak to the actual numbers.
Oh, God. You better bail 'em out.
Well, no, we're just gonna tell you the truth.
We're just, we're just, we're just trying to find someone
that can explain accounting simple enough for you.
If recall, we were expecting a large amount
of vaccines coming in for, for COVID.
Oh, the budget that was put together originally allowed for
that to be expensed in the 24 25 year.
But because that COVID vaccine failed saf,
we didn't have it available to spend in the current year.
That's why we are so, uh, uh, uh, I'm so much lower.
Um, Mr. Chair. So we this have exactly the same
conversation that we had at last annual review,
and I invite you to go back to the transcript of
that hearing where we had exactly that decision.
It was a single year transfer in the preceding
years annual review.
So how on earth can it be the case
and now in the National Pharmaceuticals purchasing
appropriation as opposed to the COVID one,
Because we hadn't negotiated with the company to get
that rebate because the contract had been done so badly
during the COVID, um, episode,
and it was, it was just a dreadful, we would,
you would never write a contract like that ever again.
So what happened was, is they actually, we had
to appropriate the money.
So that's why it was sitting there last year.
It was after actually, um, it was after the last year's, um,
but, uh, sorry, select committee
that we've actually got to a negotiation.
That negotiation was really hard.
'cause legally they didn't have to refund
and we, they didn't have to take it back.
So we had to go in and try
and do a fair negotiation to then return
that funding back to the government.
And yes, we'd appropriated it and we then refunded it.
I can promise you the only money that we've carried over is
because of promises
that we've made about a
particular medicine that we are funding.
And it's not coming in
until more into the second
year than it was in that first year. So,
Just to be clear, in relation to your earlier comment,
it's not the case that I negotiated with the Minister
of Finance to have money spent, uh,
that has subsequently not been spent.
I would notice if we lost $230 million, what the case is
that we have had a rebate, which has had
to be treated over several years
through different accounting treatments in order
to get the money where it rightfully ought
to be along the way.
Uh, farm Act has managed to fund $7 million, uh,
of it upgrades, which were long overdue using some
of the pre, uh, proceeds of that rebate.
Very well negotiated by the chair. I might add.
How does that treat coming over
Here? Supple,
Mr. Chair?
Supplementary, Thank you, chair.
My questions about the role that Phar has in,
in procuring child, uh, immunization vaccines for, to,
for contributing to the government's target
of increasing child immunization rates.
Could you speak to what PC's role is in
that, uh, in that area?
Yeah, so Phar has an unusual,
a different role when it comes
to vaccines than from other things
where we actually buy them and store them.
Uh, we don't just, uh,
negotiate the contracts and, and fund them.
So we are involved in stockpiling, uh, MMR vaccines.
Uh, if I remember rightly, I might be corrected.
There's 138,000 stockpiled right now.
Um, for context, uh, during the 2019 measles outbreak,
88,000 were issued over a two month period.
Uh, pharma have been constantly negotiating
to get more MMR vaccines in, uh, scouring the world to,
to boost our supply and keep that buffer
of a hundred thousand in place.
Uh, so when it comes to childhood, uh, immunization,
we have a, a vital role.
Uh, and we have kept, uh, ahead of demand
through a very vulnerable time.
Uh, the real shame is that immunization rates dropped
so dramatically between 2017
and 2023, uh, that we are now playing catch up.
But PX certainly playing, uh, playing a, a, a,
a noble role in assisting that catch up.
I think it's one of the most, um, remarkable things
that the PX staff do, actually, the experts trying
to work out what, what people are gonna do, what might come,
you know, what might come our way, like the measles outbreak
that we've seen, you know, how we get in front of that
and yet not overspend
and have stuff sitting there that we then need to throw out,
which does happen occasionally, you know, of course.
But trying to get that balance, I just, I mean,
how this team does that, I just find absolutely remarkable.
Yeah. And then, you know, with the measles outbreak as,
as the minister said, we had, you know,
I think we had 110,000 doses, um, in New Zealand at
that time, and quite correctly, you know,
the last time we had an outbreak
and they did a big push like that, it was about 88,000.
But by the time I rang, you know, two hours later, um,
the team had already ordered
more and they were on their way.
You know, people
All right, we're very close.
Time up. I was just, oh, yes, please, Mr. Jet.
How, how does PP, um, account
for the economic benefit from a vaccine?
Um, because of course it is a preventative measure, some of,
some of the only preventative measures we have
for some of these diseases.
How does actually, um, account for economic
gain from vaccines?
Well, that's a technical question. I dunno.
Natalie might be,
I can, I can take a, come
Off the field in the final quarter. Yeah.
Uh, So
through the health technology assessment process, uh,
team does quite an in-depth analysis.
They look at quality adjusted life years population impact
and use factors of consideration
to look at not only the math, the math along that,
but actually the impact on people to get an estimate of, of
that broad population impact.
And I think as always, when the team evaluates medicines,
they try to have the, the greatest value for the most number
of people, uh,
and balance that against high health needs populations.
And when there are higher health needs
that may impact smaller number of people, take
that into account through the various
mechanisms. Does that help?
Yes. Excellent. Thank you. Thank you. Very good.
Thank you very much, Dave. Thank you. See you guys.
We are here for enough, two or three hours. Lucky you.
Byebye. I warmed that up for you.
Thank you. Yeah, some water, someone
The warm up really wasn't it? There you
Go. Yeah, yeah. No,
it's really get going.
Okay. Um, we're gonna have short breaks at three
and four, just for five minutes.
Great. Thank you very much. Um, thank you very much.
Um, uh, Mr.
Chair and thank you very much to,
um, members of the committee.
I'm gonna make some opening remarks
and then if the committee would like, um, thank you.
Give Natalie an opportunity to perhaps introduce herself
and her background a little bit more.
So I wanted to start by saying I'm just so incredibly proud
of pharma, and particularly in the last 12 months,
I have seen, um, what they've accomplished in the last year.
And it is just absolutely, fundamentally different, um,
an organization than it certainly was two years ago.
And even at the beginning of last year.
Um, you can see it, you can feel it, you can read it,
and the results that we are getting, um,
and the feedback that we are getting from the public,
and, um, that's incredibly, incredibly enlightening.
I, I mean, as the minister said, you know, sort
of 83 new listings
or widening access with that 604 million,
the expectation was
that we would probably get about 45 to 50.
But due to the negotiating, due to the work that they did,
I mean, within weeks of, um, getting confirmation
that we would get that funding,
we had new medicines going out.
So the minister's quite right.
There's a bunch of people
there that were just sitting there.
Of those, we had 33 cancer and 33 non-cancer.
So we got to 66 within that
with the funding from the 604 million.
But we actually did 83 in that financial year.
And the reason is, as we were saying,
because of the negotiating, because patients coming off
and so often we think we can only get new medicines
with new money, but we prove through the $150 million worth
of savings that we are making,
that actually we can still do our job and do it well.
That's just harder to reach deeper into that, um, into
that OFI and into that list.
Um, so far, I'm gonna, I'm gonna get my number wrong now
because it changed today with the Roche bundle.
Um, went out this morning, which was pretty exciting.
Um, but our numbers now, let me get it right.
Um, as of this, um, 25, 26,
our widened access has been 14.
Um, uh,
and the new listings is four,
so the total has been 18 so far.
And that's with us not getting a budget uplift, um,
for medicines as such in the last budget.
Um, and that again has just been, you know,
but I think today's, um,
and um, chief executive might like
to speak a little bit more to it, um,
at some stage if there's questions.
But that bundling from Roche has been really interesting as
to how you can then you, you're literally negotiating
and saying, we'll pay this price,
but we'd like this one for free,
or we'd like this one to come in at cross neutral, um,
and make that sort of stuff.
The, um, minister talked about the medical devices,
just thank goodness there's a decision to be quite frank.
So of the, um, of the 55 different categories that they did
through medical devices, we've got 27 of them
and Health New Zealand have got 28 of them of that
for the first time in New Zealand.
We have got a comprehensive list now
of 220,000 medical devices.
So when I was here last time, um, Dr.
We were saying how hard it was to get that list together
and know what was actually in the health system
and that, you know, this hospital might call something,
you know, this device that,
and then another hospital had
a completely different term for it.
So being able to get that,
that'd be the first time in New Zealand.
As I say that, we've actually had a comprehensive list
of what we've got in there.
Um, I'd love to talk innovation pathways,
but I think that's up to the committee as to, um,
how much they kind of wanna go there.
I really want to talk more about the Farm Act reset,
which I just think is, um, absolutely
changing the whole organization.
So both internally and externally.
Um, we made, so we've got a stage one,
which is a 12 month reset going then for stage two,
which is another four years to take the first stage, is
to look at our vision, um,
and our strategic vision enhancing consumer engagement
and trust, improving internal processes.
So we're well on the way with that and having, um, Dr.
Malcolm Mulholland's team of 10 really as part of that
is proving and valuable quite frankly, as to how we look.
Next big steps, which we could talk maybe onto, is
how we now engage differently with clinicians.
And I know that, um, that Margaret has ideas and,
and views on how we could be be using those teams,
but looking at how we're assessing
and how we're technically getting
the information that we need.
And also working with big pharma,
which is really interesting.
So I introduced, um, Dr. Margaret Walter properly.
So, um, been on the board now for nearly three years, two
and a half coming up to three years.
Um, comes from a respiratory clinical background
and held various, um, high level, uh,
health management roles.
So I brought her for her expertise 'cause she's incredible.
A smart woman brings smarter ones with them.
It's what I've always thought.
So it's on that note that I introduced you properly to, um,
Natalie Mc Murry.
So Natalie's been 11 weeks in the job,
so if we are a little bit between us, um,
we're doing our best and we've got a
fantastic team there as well.
But can I hand to Absolutely. Yeah. Section.
Thank you. Uh, Mr. Chairman, committee members.
I'm extremely, uh, grateful to be here representing Phar.
I've come as the minister set from Canada Edmonton.
I'm a clinical pharmacist by background.
And then I've spent the last 25 years really in the health
system, uh, the Alberta Health Services area,
managing many teams in hospitals and clinical excellence.
And then most recently worked is in government of Alberta
with our public drug plan and public insurance plan.
And I'm really proud to be here, part of pharma. Thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I'll try to know as many answers as I can with my 11 weeks.
Thank you.
Thank you. I just had a question, staff turnover,
which has increased from last term.
We noted in your report that relocating is one
of the more common reasons
for the increase in staff turnover.
Could you outline what are some
of the other reasons other than relocating
that have been at the top?
Yeah, I mean, that's very operational, um,
so it's probably more appropriate that you do.
But, um, we do get a report to the board, um,
quite regularly, you know, some as a younger workforce,
so we've got very, very smart, um, people that work for us.
And so often we are a stepping stone to them.
Going on to other opportunities would be fair as well.
I would say. Thanks both. Hmm.
I, it's one of the things when I came on
that I also picked up on
and have, we've asked the team to pull together
what their engagement retention plan is.
And I think the FAR committee has also asked
for an in-depth review of all of the reasons,
and we can provide some of those next time we're here.
But in general, the, the relocation is a big driver.
Uh, we do lose a number of people to our supplier community
because they are quite young, mobile technical expert group.
And then I think, you know, there has been a period
of change and periods of change often do cause
some challenges with retaining people where they want to
try other options.
Uh, we're a small organization
and so sometimes progression can be difficult.
We have a very stable, uh, retention rate for our tier three
and above managers.
So some, sometimes there isn't the number of opportunities
to move through our small organization. You
Conduct pulse surveys, we and the workplace?
We do. And if so, what what are the results of these?
Uh, the pulse surveys have shown our engagement to be
steady, although we're trying to improve, uh,
our team has an engagement plan with the staff, um,
and our people leaders meet regularly.
Our, our reports staff, our committee show great, um,
positive culture amongst our people leaders.
And they're, we've,
we've got a plan which includes bringing on expertise
that we've retained to, to do presentations.
And the staff looked at our engagement survey
and they were able to give input into
what areas they would like
to most concentrate on for the upcoming year.
And one of the areas they've picked was feedback, how
to give better feedback to their own staff members and,
and colleagues in a professional
and sort of growth mindset way.
So that's one area of focus that we have this year.
And just finally, um, you're looking
to replace every staff
that you've basically lost at this point to
Moving? Yes,
and yes. We've got more staff now than we had 12
months ago, mainly
because of the work that was going on last year.
So certainly we've increased the number of staff
and even changes within the organization in general,
people are getting, um, other opportunities within the
organization at the moment because, um, we,
uh, we are stretched.
Excellent, thank you. Um,
and you've kind of alluded to it, um, already in some
of you, your answers about the reset program.
So Pharma of course has, um, had a number of reviews since,
uh, 2021, I suppose.
Um, so can you give us some examples?
Uh, I think there was 33 recommendations that P had,
and I think there was a document from July this year,
which ticked a number of those off.
Um, how, how are you progressing with the others to date
and are there any concrete examples of how, how you,
how you in incorporating consumer voice, um,
and Pharmax operations?
I mean, as the, um, as Natalie has identified there,
you know, family's been through a lot in the last few years,
and certainly from that 2022 review then
to the cultural review, then
to the consumer engagement workshops.
Um, it sort of got to the stage for the board really,
where we just went enough.
Like we've, we know what needs to be done, it's now a matter
of execution and how we do it e equally
because they've been so incredibly busy, you know,
they're 83 new medicines and then another 14
or another 18 in the last few months, you know,
that's, that's extraordinary.
So you've gotta make sure that they're doing the number one
job, which is the assessment and negotiating
and getting those medicines to New Zealanders
as quickly as possible.
Alongside of that, we're trying to do a whole new reset
of an organization that was pretty much the same
as it's been since 1993 when it was, um, brought in.
So we took the, we went back
and did another look at the 2022 review.
We went through, and I'm not gonna get my numbers exactly
right, so someone can correct me if I don't,
but from memory, we kind of went of the 33,
my math's not gonna add up.
So there we go, we'll just go with that right now.
But of that, I think it was something like 19, we were able
to say completed, there was about 17,
so my maths probably not already.
Um, but there was a, another whole lot
that were almost superseded by other work that had happened.
And then there's always a couple that need to keep going.
It's quite interesting 'cause now we report
to the 90 day reset program they do to the board.
And that's quite interesting.
Um, and I think we had five, um, uh, sort of priorities
for the first 90 days.
And feedback that we got was that, you know,
a little over ambitious, um, for the capability
and capacity within the organization.
But then equally when you touch on consumer engagement, it,
um, you know, the, the, the traffic light said in progress.
And certainly the board went back
and said, um, I hope it always says in progress
because I'd hope it's never done.
You know what I mean? Like, if we are not constantly
changing our engagement, looking at what we are doing,
being brutally honest with ourselves and with them.
Um, the chief executive has is monthly that you do with
consumers and with patient advocate groups? Yes, yeah,
With a monthly consumer group where we feed, get all
of their input, feedback, um, discussions on consultations
that have maybe gone out the month
before, it's been quite helpful.
And then with that, now we've got the, um, consumer
and patient working group.
So they selected the members for that,
they selected the chair.
That was not, um, we set up the mechanisms,
but for me around transparency, openness, you've got
to let them own actually how they're doing it.
So there's, you know, for too long,
pharma could kind of almost set it up.
And so there's a lot of departments, you know, we used
to know what you want the outcome to be and how to do it,
and then massage that into what it is.
Um, so they've, their terms of reference are theirs.
We are there to support by the secretariat to help
with the work program as far as what we see as priorities.
But the first time we're actually pulling the whole HTA
to bits, you know, like 16 steps
and some of them low risk, you know,
like I I I'm not from a medical background, right?
So I just couldn't understand it at all, you know,
and then these, then we, we are not getting
through the assessments and the time that we should at all.
And you've gotta sort of sit back and go, why?
So now I think we've got, um,
PA being more actively involved,
clinicians we are looking at, but,
but we, we will seriously look at assessments
differently. Mm-hmm.
Can I just, so, um, one, one of those recommendations was
around rare disorders, um,
and pharma, uh, is reviewing their rare disorder policy, um,
settings to align with a strategy
that was published in July, 2024.
Uh, can you give us an update on where P is with,
with this work in rare disorders?
Uh, I think we're off to
A good start with, uh, a redefinition of
what a rare disorder really is.
So it's not ultra rare and unbelievable.
It's now one in 2000.
So that brings that down to the kinds of diseases
that you may know someone with a family,
with someone affected by this disease.
So that brings that group
of rare disorders right into our sites.
It's not easy, um, um, meeting the expectations
of rare disorders groups,
but at least we're in step with other parties,
including the ministry.
Um, and we have to, we have to do what we've been doing
with all the reset, uh, work,
which is not just listen, but actually hear.
Because when we actually hear from people
with lived experiences
and when we think about
how an investment here could actually impact throughout
their life, not just for the next year with hospitalizations
or whatever, but for the rest of their lives, their, um,
their economic and social possibilities, we can frame,
if you like, the investment, uh, benefit in a different way.
And that's the kind of work we are on.
That's the journey we're on.
Um, but it does come down to engaging with that group,
working with them, hearing their expectations,
and trying as best as we can to fund some
of the pharmaceuticals
and devices, which will make a difference
to them in their whanau.
We heard a lot in the Valuing Life summit, um, and, and,
and, um, rare disorders are certainly a part of
that consumer and patient advocacy working group.
And, you know, one of our, you know, as,
as I'm hope we talk more about that HTA
'cause I can see you making you equally with that as well
as, you know, what are the funding streams and you know,
and I'm just, and I'm being open-minded here
and big thinking, you know, certainly not a decision by us,
but you know, are there different streams of funding?
So you are keeping true to the Farm Act model,
but you know, a really rare disorder is unlikely
to be funded if you keep doing it the way that we are with,
you know, such limited funds
and it's just not fair, you know, and it really isn't fair.
So when you look at it quite differently, that is part
of the work that we're looking at doing
over the next year or two.
And there's a differences of opinions.
So you can speak to some who are from re disorders
and they'll go, yes, ringfence us some money.
And then you go to others
and they'll say, do not ring fence money.
It didn't work last time. Criteria changes.
You know, like, so, so you know,
like we all think we know the answer, um,
but effectively it's really, it's wonderfully challenging
and something that we are really keen to take on.
Thanks. I just want to use a set of questions
to have some back and forth to understand the reset better.
I've looked at the material on the, on the website as well.
Um, and I saw in both the cultural review summary
that has been released that there needs to be a new set
of strategic priorities for far.
And I think your answer to the last set
of questions touches on on some of that
the website has details of a 90 day plan
and some, um, early initiatives
that are underway about mm-hmm.
Consumer engagement. But can you describe
what the bit about strategy is?
And I see the points made in the documentation that, um,
there's a desire to get away from what's in the statement
of intent, which tends to be, sorry, the letter
of expectations, which tends to be narrow
and instead to get to something else
and something else that's more widely consulted.
Can you describe how you're defining the something else
in terms of strategy?
Mm, I mean, the first instance, um, was even,
and it was certainly from a, from the cultural,
the Debbie Francis Cultural Review was
around vision and strategy.
And to be, um, to be quite honest with you, you know,
our staff couldn't clearly define what our vision
and what the future looked like
and what we were trying to accomplish outside of
fund more medicines as effectively as we could, you know, so
that sort of pulls you right back into the strategy,
brings you back into the values of the organization.
So the, the, the feedback that we got is the, from, from
that review and, and the board was that, um,
actually people were all, were there for the right reasons,
which was their hearts
and their heads were to deliver for New Zealanders.
They weren't quite sure that the organization itself
was strategically framed to be able to define that.
So how are you, um, uh,
this sounds like a positive project
and it sounds like, um, um,
but part of, uh, there is that formal, um, link
between what's in the act, the letter of expectations,
those sort of narrow, narrowly defined Farm act functions.
So could you just elaborate, maybe cast ahead a bit of
where you are at at the moment to
what the strategy might might be so
that we can understand it? Yeah,
We're doing both. So,
you know, um, the board sees, um,
the 13 points against a letter of expectation
and our progress that the staff have made.
You know, 'cause we've gotta deliver to our, of course,
to the government, to the minister.
So that is certainly very important to us.
And to be honest, most of it aligns.
And in fact, his first expectation was around, um, culture
and ensuring that we were getting that right.
Um, I think that we are not there and that's
because we want to bring other people.
So I can't sit here and define to you what I think
that strategy will look like.
'cause I don't believe it's up to me
and I don't even believe it's up to the board that we have
to be doing it with New Zealanders,
and particularly with those that are actively invested, um,
with the organization.
And there's amazing clinicians out there, you know, 240
of them across 31 different specialist committees
that give their expertise
for pretty much nothing, you know, to pharma.
And you know, Margaret,
you've got a view on we are not using them as effectively
as we could, you know, like, it's kinda like,
do you think we should fund this medicine?
They do amazing research and everything,
but do we actually ask them
what the future looks like and how we do it? You
Know, can I take it then the proposal
and setting a, um, wider strategy for farm is going to,
you are making plans around a consultation to
Absolutely. So everything
will be done, um, externally
and with as much transparency as we possibly could.
It's a bit like when I set a set up, you know, we set up
that committee, um, that working group, you know,
we didn't wanna define exactly what it was,
and then you can all just fit in and whether it suits you
or not, you know, we've, we are trying to build it with,
you know, with our external partners so
that it's not just a government initiative from a,
from a Crown entity, it is genuinely.
Um, and it's confronting, you know, like go,
those consumer engagement workshops were incredibly
confronting, um, for the board.
You know, when you hear about someone
that's had a lived experience and went in front of PTAC
and you know, was with a rare disorder
and was, you know, begging
for their life and their brothers.
Mm. And we're told you're two minutes up now
and no one got in touch with them afterwards. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. So we've got so much to do.
And just on the, um, scope side of the strategy,
the, um, uh, there's often discussion around, uh,
and we've, we've had back
and forth on the set select committee previously,
there's a request for a medicine strategy from part
of the sector.
And, um, I think last time I asked you,
which was a year ago, it wasn't yet defined whether
that was Farm Act job
or someone else's job in the um, system.
Is, is this about,
is this Farm Act strategy reset something about a medicine
strategy or is that something else
We can, um, Natalie's keen to talk about the processing
where we're at at the moment, so I'll let you do that.
Um, we've got a unique opportunity right now, I think, um,
we've got new leadership across Health New Zealand, across,
um, farming across the Ministry of Health actually.
So I think we, and I think that certainly
what I'm seeing from these leaders is that they want
to work quite differently as well, so
that we really are thinking about,
and there was a lot of discussion about a medicine strategy
at the Valuing Life Summit.
Um, and again, really interesting.
Um, yeah, I, I suppose I've just got my own opinions
and it's that it's just cha, I mean,
we didn't know two years ago
that a diabetes medicine could actually potentially change,
you know, um, uh, uh, you know, operations for knees
and hips and people's health, you know, with weight loss.
We didn't know five, six years ago that, you know,
you could suck blood clots out of, you know, someone
with a stroke brain and can be fine an hour later.
So I agree with the medicine strategy at some level,
but there was quite a lot
of disagreement about what that looks like.
But it was, sorry Miss Mr.
Chair, if I may, just is that the work EC is doing,
its not our, or doing how
we're gonna run, it's not our top priority. Yeah.
Got it. Thank you. And sorry, do you want a
little more on the reset process?
I was just to
What Paula said that are, we're really focused on
with the vision and strategy piece too.
We've started actively with our staff
to make sure we can bring them along, work on the vision.
We've been consulting with various groups, um,
our consumer groups PTAC on what does vision,
what does the next decade look like for you.
And our strategy will be really focused on our core
business, making sure that we're, you know,
making the right choices, making the right investments,
doing that with people,
engaging appropriately from a health equity per perspective,
timely access, best outcomes,
and then our commercial approaches.
So I think we're trying to focus that strategy around our,
our core business and then that will enable us
to feed into medicine strategy,
rare disease strategy when we've got our sort
of house in order and able to really move forward with that.
We'll be able to feed best into, you know, the wider sector
and we'll be coming out to external groups as well
to consult on that after Christmas. Thank
You, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We actually see announcement today
about pharma proposal to improve rural access
to emergency medicine.
Do you think you can give the committee a bit more
detail on this proposal? Can
I Look at you? Um, this
is, this relates to, uh, those
who are in the emergency sector such as ambulance crew,
for example, or first responders being able to have access
to the right therapeutics
and not have to worry about some of the regulations
that would've impeded them as non prescribers to, to,
to have those medications.
So for example, if you're on the far north
and you're not, not gonna be able to see a doctor
or even, um, another type of registered health professional
that has prescribing rights,
you now can see an ambulance crew that can, can carry
and can, can have the medications
and administer them in a broad ar reignment than they've
previously been able to do and have that supply also applies
to, I think, community midwives as well,
having a broader supply.
Our technical team, if they're
nodding, I'm saying the right things.
That's good. Mm-hmm.
So how, how can that improve the patient wellbeing? Well,
Because if you are in a rural area in New Zealand, um,
and you have an acute event, uh,
you're a long way from health.
So having those health professionals such
as our ambulance crew, our community midwives, et cetera,
being able to have a, a better kit, um,
at their fingertips when they're trying to deal
with your acute and potentially life threatening condition,
will certainly benefit them. Mm-hmm.
Does that mean that they need
to do extra paperwork afterwards or
because it's emergency medicine?
Right, so they probably got piece use the medicine
before they get approval
That I don't necessarily think so.
I think it will make their, their work more satisfying
and ultimately with a better outcome for the patients.
That will be less paperwork, I would hope.
But no, I don't think so.
Thank you, Ricardo. Um, going back
To some of the questions I was asking the minister on
public trust, um, are you satisfied with your rank compared
to other public agencies when it comes to public trust
and specifically where you're tracking on, uh,
trust from in Maori?
Well, we measure that. I can't remember the, to the tool.
The team can tell us which tool we use to,
to have an assessment of public trust.
I think it's fair to say that the board really did, um, um,
consider that our public trust had been a bit dented, um,
with the events that played out 18 months to two years ago.
And we've had to earn that trust.
And, and the way to earn it clearly is through, um, our, our
consumers that would lived experiences who we've invited
and to help us with the reset
and ultimately with reshaping how we do our work
as much as what we do.
Um, I think we have to earn the public trust
by being more responsive,
which means we do things better, but also faster.
Um, and that there's more certainty
for people in New Zealand with health conditions
who require medical devices
and pharmaceuticals that their medication that they wish
to have, um, can or can't
because sometimes we simply can't fund.
But having certainty allows people
to make decisions and, and other choices.
It's the uncertainty in the clinical arena, which is
so very difficult for people, um, with health issues.
But I think, I think we're on a journey
to increasing that public trust.
It's certainly the goal of the boards to secure that.
And certainly, you know, some of the past is, you know,
and, and well before any of our time sort of thing.
But you know, you you're saying no more often than you're
saying yes because you just don't have the funding.
Right? And as I say, the people
that work at pharma are there
because they actually want to, um,
and genuinely care and wanna be doing that.
But when you're having to say no to people, a lot more
what happened was as the walls came up
and they got more internally focused instead
of looking externally.
So understanding that through the couple of reviews
that we've seen and now having this reset program
that is about engaging openness, transparency,
I mean, wow, the difference in 12 months at the Valuing Life
summit for me was palpable.
But that doesn't mean we still don't have a long way to go.
So when you're applying
or you put an application in for medicine
and you're not hearing anything back from us,
and you feel like it's just gone into the, into the ether,
that's really disengaging.
Now. We've got absolute processes in place
that we are communicating.
And so I'm referencing page 39 of the report.
Um, and this is singular public trust,
your priority more broadly as well.
Relationship to that.
And when it came to the Te wa you noted in response
to your achievements,
but with a changing, with changing government priorities,
we're shifting to a focus in Maori being a high health needs
operational among others.
What did you mean by changing government priorities
in relationship to
The cabinet? Have made,
um, have done a cabinet circular
that's made it very clear that they want it on needs
and not on ethnicity.
Um, and so for us, we had to look at our organization
and make sure that we're in line with the cabinet, um,
circular equally the, um, first letter
of expectations from our, um, minister was quite clear.
Um, so for us as an organization, we need
to sit down and have a look at that.
We have made changes, um, as you know, I mean,
it was more than a year ago, so it doesn't sort of fit in
with this, but, you know, we made changes
to the Maori advisory to the, um, Ted opu.
We also, um, we had a, a, a treaty policy,
and the board made the decision a little while ago,
we're the only crown entity that had that.
And that actually we should be coming under Health
New Zealand and we should be coming under the expectations
of, um, of a Crown entities act as to
what we should be doing, um, to be doing that.
So we've, um, certainly we've certainly consulted
with our staff and then, um, have changed that.
But a Maori directorate, um, we couldn't see how
that was delivering best for the organization
and for Maori either, you know, um, at the end of the day,
we want to make sure that we have a Maori responsiveness
that's right throughout the organization
and not a tick box that's sitting in a corner,
which I'm not gonna say it was a tick box,
but you know, it felt like we've got That's okay.
It's, you know, here it is here, it should be, I
and your need should be implemented
throughout the whole organization.
And Margaret, you've got strong views on good, strong views
on actually on need and equity.
Um, and that it's real.
Yeah, it's real.
And sometimes ethnicity is the best marker of that inequity.
Um, but we do have, um, uh,
the high needs populations defined for us, and,
and Maori is at the top of the list there as Maori
and Pacific and rural and women and so on.
Um, but we are very mindful that for some conditions,
ethnicity really does, you know, equal, um,
the inequity that we have to address.
And we are very, very clear
that we must address inequities and high health needs.
We're just, but we're not taking our eye off Maori at all
simply because there has been some change in legislation.
So we can we still take it into consideration
or certainly the team doing the experts to do, you know,
around health need
and inequities when they're making decisions
around medicines or where they sit on the priority list.
The difference, I think, though now is so that might move it
around because there is a higher health need.
The difference now though is
that certainly under current government expectations
and under this board, we would not be signing off
that Maori alone would get access
to a medicine under a different set
of criteria based on their ethnicity.
So that, that, that medicine may get priority might,
it might still get there because of us taking those factors.
But, um, it's just kind of unfathomable that,
that it's based on ethnicity
that you get access to a medicine.
Um, that might mean that we are more likely to fund it,
but we would fund it for everyone
that fits the criteria of that medicine.
But I kind of heard two different things just now
Because they are different things. They're
Different Things. Well,
I mean, an acknowledgement
that ethnicity actually can play.
It can be, it can, it can be.
And in some cases it's actually a really like
important factor, right?
Mm-hmm. Um,
But what that would be, what are you,
What are you, just to finish my question, like
what are you tangibly doing different from shifting
to a framework to towards, I guess just putting MA
as a high health needs population group while also
acknowledging that actually
ethnicity is a key factor in addressing health inequities?
I don't look, we can't ignore ethnicity
because it does a, it does it, it sort
of in inextricably linked with inequities,
but our focus has to be on need and inequities first
and foremost because of the policy
setting in which we are at.
But they're almost a mirror for some conditions.
Um, but it may not, and I'm just trying to think.
Really good. The best one is lung cancer.
And of course we don't have, um,
we don't have in lung cancer, um, medications
that can fit this argument.
Well, we do when we are building up a screening
program can fit it well.
Um, the next, I guess diabetes would be a,
a very good example
where we know there is a higher prevalence
of diabetes complications in some ethnic groups,
including Maori.
Um, but when we come to our policy setting, we have
to frame our funding decisions in line
with government expectations around need.
Even acknowledging
that ethnicity is a very good marker for that.
So being taken in as a factor for consideration
and whether or not we fund and where it sits on priority,
but it doesn't mean it would be going
just to that ethnicity. Jenny,
You have a sub?
Yes. Um, we've been talking a lot about your,
your reset, excuse me.
And um, you know, in, in two years you've had, uh,
you've got a new minister for p
and um, which is a big shift from what it was previously.
You've the reviews
and undergoing this with culture shift and, and all that.
What length of time do you think it's gonna take till Barack
is functioning, how the public sees the total value
and the improvement in health gain
and where you no longer have marches in the streets?
Um, how long is that process gonna take?
Um, okay,
So I mean the recent program itself is five years,
you know, so we've got, as I say, that first 12 months
of which we are about six months in Michael.
Yes. So about six months into that.
So we've about another six months and then we've got another
four year program that we're working on
and we do a 90 day within it.
So we've broken down what does it look like in five years?
We've broken it down into 12 months chance
and then we've broken it down into 90 day
that we can actually do an assessment against as
to the progress that we are making.
So I, I just go a continuous improvement in continuous
improvement and I can already see
a massive change in our engagement.
Um, you know, trust me, patient advocates
and consumer, they were not shy
and telling me exactly what they thought.
Um, and they're still not,
it's just more often positive now than it was negative,
you know, like, I mean I I, it's embarrassing actually,
but you know, they would sort of say we would ring and,
and the phone wouldn't be picked up
and no one would call us back
and they just go, now we are proactively getting involved
and ask questions early
and if we think it might be contentious,
we ring up the right people and go, have we got this right?
Have we got it wrong? Um, Natalie and I went round
and met a whole lot of clinicians, um, a few weeks ago
and it was just fascinating for them, you know,
but one, one of the head of, um, of cancer and,
and he'd never met with the chair
or chief executive of pharma, you know,
and so to have those kinds of conversations
and build those relationships so we can ask questions
and get direct answers as a,
but you would always have protests in the street, I'm afraid
because, and petitions coming to parliament
because we can't fund all of the medicines
that people expect and they want.
And that's in some respects getting more difficult
as we see the rapid changes in advancements in both medical
devices and medicines.
And as such, everybody's expectation
and they're very expensive
and everyone's expectations are that they should get it.
So on that, um, Mr.
Chair, um, so, so in terms of those medicines
and where we're still seeing overseas, uh, standard
of care medicines but not currently available in
New Zealand, how long is, will it take?
Is it just budget uplift
or part of this change process where we can start seeing,
uh, New Zealand lifted, you know, from that bottom ranking
of 20 on the um, OECD list? In terms of,
Look, I think we can do it better
and I think we can do it more transparently and openly
and I think we should be looking at our processes
and everything all of the time,
but we will only really be able to fund, um,
many more medicines by getting,
and it's not just a billion dollars
she says with a right smile.
Um, but that would just about clear
that OEII think it's a bit more than that now.
Um, and you know, as they say,
and it's true, we are at the bottom of those sort
of 32 countries and you can get access to, I think, um,
and I'm gonna be corrected, but I think 82 more medicines,
you know, in Australia than you can here in New Zealand.
Um, and that is, um, that is, we spend,
we do spend every penny, I promise you.
Um, in fact sometimes overspend, you know, as far
as we are getting a bit ahead of it
and then promising for out years
and then having to take from that.
Um, there's not much more we can,
there's not much more we can do without the funding
To do it. Final step
on that, in terms of the OI list, um,
some have been sitting on,
on those lists for a very long time.
Um, is it fair to say that actually some of those
medicines no longer, um,
are currently, you know, best in class?
Is there, is there a shopping that happens on the
I Decline that you're doing? Yeah,
Be good. Quite good to
Understand. Yeah, thank
you. The, certainly
as we have new medicines come on,
others rank higher than some of the lower ones on the list
and the ranking is something
that's definitely contentious about people
wanting to see the rankings.
We have a current consultation out around whether we should,
if things have been on there a long time
and are no longer potentially the ones we would fund
or likely to fund, should we take them off the list?
And we've heard a lot of feedback back around that question,
and I think we're looking at all that
and we'll have to make a decision.
Uh, there's many, there's some people that say, Hey,
we should say these are no longer there
and it could come off a list, especially ones
that maybe we don't think are as contemporary
or would be fundable in the near future.
Uh, and there are others that are very, um,
strident in wanting to keep, keep them on no, no matter
what, even if there's a hope that they may be funded later.
So we're, we're openly consulting on that.
I think the consultation just closed
and I know Adrian can tell you more about that,
but certainly something we're looking at
Lyre I Have
a sub For. Yeah,
I've got two very quick sub things, just trying
to reconcile the different parts of your answer
to Ricardo's question.
The first is, um, just to be really clear, what's far
position is ethnicity clinically
relevant? Oh, there we go.
That, oh, that's a very good question, answer.
'cause as a clinician, I'm always going to say
that this stays clinically, uh, relevant,
but in respect of what we do in our business that we run,
we are focused on needs in the current policy setting.
Okay. But doesn't mean to say we don't notice
or take notice of ethnicity, um, for the reasons I spoke
before, but in this current policy setting,
we are focusing on need
and we have the strategic high needs population.
So that's more of a Pacific, um,
rural children and women.
I think I've got the five, right? Um, so
That probably answered my point.
Thank you. Thank you
Asha. You hit us up on that. Mm,
I did think items being moved off the options
for investment list.
Um, I understand you're in the middle of responding
to your consultation, so I won't ask you
to preempt where you go with that.
But, um, it seems a part of that puzzle would be, um,
uh, let's say you remove an item that is no longer the best,
um, antihypertensive that we should purchase next,
because there's others out there.
If you remove it, would you go look for the other one
We've been discussing?
It's alright. And how proactive we should be actually.
And um, because you know, we've been talking a lot about,
you know, we don't ask for applications as such.
We're the only country in the world though that gets
so many, um, applications from clinicians
and from, um, patients, about half of them now,
which is extraordinary, which slows down our process.
I've gotta be really honest because, um,
pharmaceutical companies give us a lot more data
and a lot more research and a lot more of all of that.
So we've often then you go back to a busy clinician
and they've, I I gave you as much information as I've got
and you know, so that can really delay things.
But the decline things, um, hence going out there
and talking openly about it because it is controversial.
So some as, as, as nearly said, some are going, look,
if I'm gonna be sitting at the bottom,
but I had a specialist only in New Zealand to, you know,
sat down at my table and um, at the airport
and he said, I got a phone call the other day
and he said, my initial was, yep, you may as well, you know,
if it's gonna be to cliff, it's that low email
to client goes, then I rung back
and went, no, hold on a minute, there's a better medicine.
I need to get that application in first
and make sure that that's in the mix
before you take the other one off.
And you know, so
Yeah, I think it's, we've had such similar feedback
and we will go through it all.
Adrian is going through all
of the various pieces of feedback.
I think, um, we don't currently have that process
where if we take a class off of a list,
well we don't take anything off a list now it stays on
forever, but you know, that active looking at the class,
making sure we have the right first line or,
or second line therapies on the OFI, et cetera.
I think that's what you're, what
You're asking. Yeah, correct. Yeah.
Some of it, I mean if, um, if, um, Dr.
Dave Hughes was here, you know,
'cause I've asked lots of these sorts of questions and,
and he would say, we've always got an, uh, an eye out
of what's happening in the world and what's coming up
or gaps where we just don't think we do have medicines
and for a particular disease or a particular,
and so, you know, he said it might not be that we are pro,
you know, but we might be bringing up
and saying, Hey, have you got this in the mix?
You know, are you looking at,
and you know, sometimes when we're
asked of why aren't we funding?
And it's like, well we haven't even got an
application for it yet.
But yeah, I will say that, um, it's my understanding,
I haven't been at all the PTAC meetings,
but uh, David certainly made clear
that in the p tac discussions when they're looking at
what they're recommending, they will often go and,
and there's a gap here
and someone will actually put in an application.
It could be, uh, by the committee
or another clinician to make sure
that we've covered off this.
If I could just pick up on, um, Ms.
Bennett's earlier comments that we have the highest rate of,
um, submissions from clinicians
and sometimes, uh, their patient groups, aren't they?
They make the, um, uh,
professional societies make the submissions
and in in the world.
Well, does that reflect it?
And, and that they are hard for gut for, for you to manage
because, um, because they don't provide all the same
information a pharmaceutical company would provide.
Is that not suggesting there's a role
for government here in actually taking on that
workload and not leading
It to busy clinicians to do after potentially Yeah,
and that's some part of that ht a process, you know,
that we are looking at completely pulling all the bits.
The first step is application, right? Mm-hmm.
So we've made it easier for people to apply
and hence while we're getting more of them
and we encourage them
and you know, so, so, so that, so that's part
of the reason we're getting so many more from them.
Um, but equally that's a really good, that's part
of the questions that we're doing as we work our way
through those hopefully fewer than 16 steps in the future.
And Mr. Chair will be, now,
now I'll be allowed my primary question
You won't, sorry.
Exactly. You're on list.
I'm kind of lead leading on on probably
from that answer actually.
You've just, just given, how do you intend
to take a long-term view of your approach
to funding and investment?
And you've talked a lot about kind
of changing the health technology assessment.
You've talked about kind of reaching out, um, through the,
um, application process to kind of see what needs,
what should be, um, different groups act actually want h
how, how are you gonna take a long-term view to kind of,
how, how are we gonna navigate forward in the
purchasing of medicines for New Zealand? Yeah,
I mean Natalie can probably speak to that,
but you know, I mean you touched on it with the minister,
you know, $150 million in savings that we were able
to then completely reinvest into medicines that was from,
um, how we negotiate and how we do it.
And the fact that people actually don't know the list.
Um, they know the list, sorry, but they don't know the
priority ranking on the list, um, gives us power
because when we go to negotiate, if they play, you know,
we can go, we can just go to the next one on the list
and come back to you in a few months, you know,
'cause we are gonna get faster and a and a better deal.
And so it does sort
of have some acute thinking for people as well.
Um, I don't think people understand the rebate part
of Natalie and mm-hmm.
You and I were talking about that this morning
and I think this might be a good opportunity
'cause this is unique to how it goes. Well,
I think, um, One of the,
as you know, and you can see in our annual statements,
the team has strong negotiating
and commercial approaches that some of those, uh,
the ranking of the OFI
and having that as commercially
sensitive material helps with that.
But as, as you can see for, for every one,
for the 1.6 million, uh, billion dollars
that's invested in medicines by the crown, the, the
OR active group is able to
negotiate over a bi just about a billion dollars worth of
rebates from, from companies through
the commercial approaches we take,
which means we have $2.7 billion worth
of medicines delivered from the $1.6 billion of crown money.
So that's an excellent return on medicines for New Zealand.
And part of our process, uh, you know, in terms of how we do
that, the team has excellent commercial approaches,
negotiation tactics
and some of these things that are difficult sometimes, um,
to understand, help, help with that, the process,
you know, how are we gonna improve it and how timely it is.
And Dr. Burrell's comments around, you know,
can we make it easier upfront, you know,
that may require some investment, um, as you say,
and we've invested in other parts of the process,
health eco help, more HealthCo economics support so
that we can get through applications faster.
And then we have to look as Paula says about what the,
the 10 year view that you spoke of is
how there aren't enough people to really make sure we're
as efficient as possible.
So ai, where can it help us in the process
and how do we create some expedited pathways
that also reduce our risk,
still maintain our commercial approaches,
still address patient family needs, make high needs groups,
but maybe there's part, if they're a small expenditure
or a small group, we can expedite
through some of our processes.
So they're all things we're looking at to try and,
And we haven't even touched on, um, sort
of societal impact
and, you know, social investment,
which I think I should just
put that in the hands of the committee.
'cause you know, that's, um, if you want to talk more about
that, but that's fascinating.
Uh, well, I think kind of,
that's probably actually where I was kind of going.
Yeah, no, that's with, with kind of going, going forward.
Mm. Um, actually the strategic kind of
Role, Yeah, I mean of investment in, in pharmaceutical,
Obviously I can't, you know, and wouldn't name medicines
and things like that, but these things that we could fund,
now that we know
and we already look at the overall health, um, savings,
but what sort of waiting we give that has been interesting,
as you can imagine with social investment, um,
working age populations.
And so I don't think social investment will work
for every medicine all of the time
because that just wouldn't be fair in not the New Zealand
kind of way that we do things.
But there are medicines that we could prove
that you could invest to save, you know,
and you can think about, um, knee
and hip operations, where they come from.
You can think about things like, um, you know, a multitude
of illnesses that actually, uh, with the technology
and the way it's going, if we were able to, I mean,
a great example is around, um, SMA I'm gonna use
because, you know, we now fund that for, um, for children
and the, um, the drug for them to get that earlier.
Now we're we're, um, heel pricking the baby
and doing the test on SMA
and from memory we met with, um, Dr. Brady.
And from memory there's like five a year,
it's not very many, it's like three to five a year.
So it's, it's not many.
So we can we fund the medication that they can get, um,
and getting that means that the,
it's a degenerative disease.
So as such, they're keeping their bodily, you know,
they're getting motor, the, their,
their normal development is what I wanna say.
That's what we can see. But there's, gosh, there's gonna be,
instead of them having to have, you know, monthly, um,
injections or daily pills, it's gonna get to a, you know,
there's, there's a gene therapy now
that they can be given once.
So historically what, what we've done in assessing, um,
and whether or not to fund a new medicine is
to look at it from a, a health economic model.
And that's very much, um, anchored around the kind of, uh,
benefits that are, that are published or,
or advertised through clinical trial publications
and scientific journals.
Um, and those are often clinical measures.
Um, they've increasingly started to, um, uh,
the journals have required,
or the sponsors of the trials have required some patient
related outcome measures.
But broader economic
and societal social measures are simply not captured in
those kind of, of analysis
because the, the origins of
that information come from the clinical trial work,
establishing the drug works and is safe.
But our, our consideration of social investment, um,
principles is that maybe a drug wouldn't score
so highly on a traditional cost utility
or health economics analysis,
but my score higher if you look at years
of productive working or contribution to family.
And so, and whanau welfare for example.
And, and maybe we should invest with some
of those broader measures in mind.
Um, and we're just exploring how to do that.
And we've done some provisional work with the University
of Erasmus in Holland.
So more to come in that space.
The other point you made referenced
before was around, um, the growth in health technologies.
You referenced CAR T-cell therapy and it's come up once,
but how do we as a sector,
because it's not just us, it's Ministry of Health
around policy settings and, and regulations.
It's Health New Zealand that has
to administer such therapies.
Um, how do we as a country look at
where those therapies will sit in our
repertoire of therapeutics?
Um, and, and and how should we fund them?
And, and that's, it's a huge piece of work
and we still only, we probably only have, um,
maybe 10 years worth of data out of CAR T-cell therapy
and it's very much been individual
and quasi experimental, um, use of the therapy.
Uh, so we don't know where it's going to sit in terms
of long-term benefits.
We don't have those data yet.
So a lot of work to do in that space,
I think strategically for us.
But the health sector as a whole, yes.
So is pharma doing any work, um, around car tcell
and how, how pharma will be looking to, to participate,
appreciate it could be a joint thing
between Health New Zealand since there
is multiple parts to it.
So I'll just comment.
We have, uh, the cancer agency leading, uh,
multi-agency working group to which we have our medical
Chief Medical Officer, David Hughes participating along
with Health New Zealand, the Ministry of Health to look at
how we're going to really approach CAR T strategically
as well as we have applications in for the, the parts
of the CAR t uh, process.
That would be the medicine part that Dr.
Rell commented about. But as you know, it requires,
you know, uh, lab lab
resources in health New Zealand technical expertise, uh,
to be able to really deliver it.
So it's gonna be an all, all agency effort to make sure
that we've delivered CAR T therapy.
Mm, we can just step on that again, sorry.
So, so appreciate car, CAR T cell
that you've got the cancer agency
leading, leading that work.
Um, it's not outta the realm of possibility
that it may be used for all, for also
for autoimmune diseases or non-cancer.
Mm-hmm. Cancer conditions.
Do you think kind of you,
the work the cancer agency is leading could then be then
mirrored, um, for other, other disease
Areas? I think, yeah, I do
think it will be a model.
Uh, 'cause I think there will be, there will be many.
I I anticipate there'll be many other therapies into the
future that would have this, that will become more
and more complex and have a technology component as well
as a medicine component
and a large impact in maybe new ways
of delivering within Health New Zealand
and expertise that's needed on the medical
side to enable it.
So I think it, it can serve as a model
for how we'll do that in the future.
Okay. We've got, um, primary is to serve on knows, we're
Cam, Asha, Ingrid, Jenny
Model's a primary, but it seems like a sub
after that question, which is about the cancer control
agency and the work that, um, pharma does
with the cancer control agency.
But what, what you talked about what's happening with the,
um, cast car Tcell leadership
that Cancer Control agency's doing, has there been any other
value that, that you've been able
to leverage from having the cancer control agency in the
public framework?
Has there been, uh, any medicines that are funded
because of the cancer control agency?
Does what, what is the cancer control agency contributing
to the scheme, um,
that you've been able to, to leverage off?
Well, to be fair, 13 cancer
medicines were funded last year and 604 million
because they named it in a report.
And yeah, politics played it's game
and, you know, and that's how that happened.
Can't see that happening again, unfortunately, um,
from a getting lots of money perspective.
But, um, so, you know,
that's probably at a high level what I could say.
I mean, as I have said, we've got a unique opportunity
with new leaders right across, um,
and certainly the cancer, um,
control agency is gonna be the same.
And that respect, I think that board chairs
ministers can have a very different expectation
on how they work together.
So instead of everyone sort of being in their,
in their four corners, you know, um,
and um, health New Zealand kind of being the big brother
that overalls everybody and,
and you get on, I'm seeing much more collaboration,
much more conversation, much more of
that I think right across the,
That's a fantastic thing to hear.
I know, I guess to further to Dr.
Campbell's, uh, point, you know, uh, CAR T cell for example,
could be used in immuno um, compromised issues,
but that's not something that gets control agency, uh,
being a leader of this, um,
working group, I think is what you called it.
Uh, like do you think
that having the cancer control agency actually in the
position is, is causing a narrowing of the scope or
I guess someone had to, someone had question is
What I'm trying to ask is, you know, we have,
we've had cancer control agency come in here
and tell us that, um, they've,
the work they've done has probably led
a whole lot of, uh, funding.
And you've mentioned the 13 drugs,
but I guess you know, them being named in a report
by Cancer Control Agency.
I'm just trying to find from your experience
what other value they've brought to us as well.
I don't think that's our role
to actually give a judgment on another agency. I
Thought it might not be, but I still
Ask and we'll be doing. So,
um, we should be, we should be,
we should be public servants and um, and just,
and stay in our lane, I think.
Yeah. And I will say that certainly all of the work
that we've done with them has been extremely collaborative.
Nice. Thank you. Excellent.
Hey, we're, um, we can come back to this one,
but it's almost three o'clock.
I thought we'd stop for a five minute break.
We can return then we're suspended for five minutes.